May 2023
========
Not quite as good of a month as last month thanks to a real dud, but mostly great stuff here.

_The Spear Cuts Through Water_ by Simon Jimenez
-----------------------------------------------
I took a while with this one, to the point where I was asked if I was actually enjoying it seeing as how my usual reading pace seemed to have dropped substantially. And at the time, I was also wondering if I was enjoying it, which doesn't really sound like the _greatest_ recommendation for a book ever, but here's the thing:

_The Spear Cuts Through Water_ is an astonishing accomplishment and you should read it. Now.

The reason I was having trouble with it is because _The Spear Cuts Through Water_ is unlike basically any other book I've ever read. The plot is fairly ordinary&mdash;two young men team up to overthrow the corrupt and evil government and also save the country and probably the world&mdash;but bluntly, if the plot _weren't_ basic, the book would be way too much.

For one thing, the book is largely told in the second person. It's a bold choice, one that very easily could feel like a gimmick, but it absolutely works here. The frame of the story is that You are in a theater while dreaming, being told a story that Your grandmother (and seemingly everyone else in your family) told You from the old country which Your family fled and which is currently in the grips of a war. This forced perspective gives the various perspectives the story is told with an immediacy it otherwise would not have.

Another thing that could easily have come across as gimmicky is Jimenez' habit of inserting a quick perspective shift into the text. So, for example, we'll be going along the story and one of the main characters will notice a dead body on the road, and then we get a few sentences of italicized text where the dead person talks about how they hadn't wanted to travel the road, but they'd had no choice. Where most epic stories lose track of the small people crushed underfoot along the way (or else are insufferably moralistic on that point), Jimenez here elegantly threads the needle and simply refuses to consider the idea that, just because these are not the main characters, their stories are any less important or worth hearing.

Also, if you're into queer love stories, you'll find here, and if you're unwilling to read queer love stories, fuck off. If you have _any_ tolerance at all for fantasy books, go out and read this one, you won't be disappointed.

_The Winner_ by David Baldacci
------------------------------
In the lobby of my apartment building, people dump their books when they've finished with them. My book collection has actually gotten rather larger this way, and most of the books have actually been pretty good.

This, however, was not good at all.

_The Winner_ is an excruciatingly-paced thriller with a decent premise: what if someone rigged things for you to win the lottery, and as the only condition, made you leave the country&mdash;and then you had to come back? Perfectly serviceable premise as these things go, but _The Winner_ wastes it entirely. The main problem is, as previously stated, the pacing, taking hundreds of pages to get to the point where our protagonist has collected her winnings, but it's hardly the only failing of the text. The prose is overwritten, the characterization is thin, the stereotyping of poor rural America is honestly offensive, and if the author wasn't masturbating while writing about his protagonist's breasts, he nevertheless succeeded in giving the impression that he was.

I have no idea how this book made it through to publishing. If it had been a serialized novel, I might have understood that based on the number of plot threads that don't end up going anywhere, but surely someone would have cleaned it all up when putting it out as a bound copy&mdash;and no, it was _not_ originally written serially. At half the length, it may have worked as an enjoyably bad romp, but at 628 pages, this ended up being a pleasureless slog.

_Bloodlands_ by Timothy D Snyder
---------------------------------
Snyder takes an in-depth look at the mass murders that took place in the transwar period in what was then eastern Poland, Belarus, and Ukraine, starting with the engineered famine in Ukraine and ending with the Doctors' Plot. This makes it a profoundly depressing read, because it's not like you're going to read about Treblinka and be uplifted by it.

(Something the book takes its time in explaining is that the popular perception of the Holocaust is profoundly warped, because the images one has comes from places where people survived. Treblinka and other such death camps didn't have the associated work camp that Auschwitz had and had a survival rate _well_ under 1%. Also, thanks to this being true of Treblinka, Belzec, Chelmno, Majdanek, and Sobibor, where the combined death toll was higher than two million and barely any escaped, popular media doesn't discuss the death camps because there is no conventional story to be had there, and still less some fucked up gentile savior story the likes of which constitutes the majority of films about the Holocaust.)

But where _Bloodlands_ gets most interesting is in its thesis, namely that the conventional understanding of totalitarian regimes, mostly taken from Hannah Arendt, is wrong. The conventional understanding is that totalitarian movements atomize society so thoroughly that people are willing to subsume themselves into a mass just to feel any sense of human connection, but will also consequently visit violence upon just about whoever the people at the top want dead. What Snyder points out is that, if you lived in Russia (not the Soviet Union generally, Russia specifically) during this entire period or Germany during the Third Reich, the violence was actually comparatively unlikely to be visited on you, let alone murder. It was in the territories that were considered borderlands where the totalitarian regimes actually did the murdering, which points to Arendt having massively overthought (and under-researched, although Snyder is gracious on this point) the mechanisms of totalitarian governments.

_The Last Graduate_ by Naomi Novik
----------------------------------
This is the sequel to [_A Deadly Education_](202304#a-deadly-education-by-naomi-novik), and therefore begs comparison to that book. Unfortunately, like many sequels, this one doesn't quite live up to the first volume&mdash;but it's still excellent, and I'll keep going with the series.

I can't really discuss this one in depth without some spoilers, and I'd rather not spoil the pleasures this one has to offer, but suffice it to say:

- The cliffhanger the first book ends on is largely ignored here, which is certainly has a rock-solid in-universe explanation but still doesn't feel like a great authorial choice
- The ending is abrupt, even knowing that there is a sequel
- The twist in the middle of the book is inspired and a brilliant way of making sure that this doesn't feel like the marking-time-middle-book that the second entry in a trilogy often feels like
- The continued relentless focus on class politics in a magic school novel is honestly refreshing