July 2023
=========

_Spare_ by Prince Harry
-----------------------
I think it's the best-selling book of the year, and it was not easy to come by at the library, but I have now read Prince Harry's memoirs. They are highly readable, they have some extremely juicy details, and they are quite entertaining on the whole (if a bit poorly-paced).

However, having read them, there's something distinctly fishy about the affair. It's not that I don't believe that, for example, he had frostbite on his circumcised penis during a trip to the North Pole. It's not even that I think there's _any_ story in the book that's an actual lie on his part.[^1] However, I still came away from the book feeling Harry had been less than honest in the writing.

[^1] There are, however, stories that are clearly not true. For example, he tells the story that his mother's last birthday gift to him was an XBox. She died in 1997. The XBox was released in 2001. Harry even admits he has no memory of this story, just that he's seen it in so many other accounts of his life story that he believes it might be true. If it was some other console, my money's on it having been an N64.

As a quick example, Harry talks about how close he was with his brother, William. However, we generally only hear about that closeness in its absence: we were normally close, but there was something off this time. There is something deeply off-putting to keep hearing "we were close" and then to get so few examples of it. Even a trip the two of them make to Lesotho together becomes more notable for how William didn't mention he was planning to propose to his girlfriend at the end of it. Other parts of the book have a similar problem where a refusal to show instead of tell starts feeling significant.

Harry explicitly states that the purpose of the memoir is to explain why he left having an active role in the monarchy, and the good times undermine that purpose. But Harry keeps referring to a good strong relationship that is _never_ actually shown in his book, so... what's _actually_ going on here? Was the relationship actually there but he felt uncomfortable adding it in for some reason or other, and if so, was that reason malicious? Was the relationship always bad and he simply can't admit it?

There's also a fair bit about Harry's time as a soldier in Afghanistan. Where hte rest of the book often takes an anti-colonialist turn, Harry never questions the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan... which was itself a colonialist enterprise.[^2] Yes, the Taliban were a depraved lot and I don't think the world's any worse off for many of them being dead, but is the world any _better_ off for an international coalition having gone in for twenty years to prop up a series of corrupt regimes in an attempt to have a friendly (and open-to-free trade) state in the region?

[^2] If you're about to say "but 9/11," the Taliban offered to hand over Osama Bin Laden to a neutral third country prior to the invasion in exchange for halting the bombing of Afghanistan and evidence of Bin Laden's masterminding of the 9/11 attacks. The invasion did not have to take place to put Bin Laden on trial.

In short, the memoirs feel like a collection of half measures. There's an iceberg here, and a vaster story being hinted at, but the result is that for all that parts of Harry come closer into focus, others become all the blurrier.

_Our Missing Hearts_ by Celeste Ng
----------------------------------
This is set in a dystopian future US where, in the aftermath of an economic collapse, the country adopted measures to allow the government to re-home children, which is mostly used to target Asian American families and people who protest the government. Hatred of Asian Americans (and Asians more generally) is at an all-time high and is basically official policy.

So this is a perfectly reasonable backdrop for the book. Sinophobia (and other anti-Asian prejudices) are common in the US and always have been, anti-Asian animus as official policy has historically been a reality, and the government kidnapping kids is also a fairly common historical occurrence&mdash;just ask Indigenous Americans about that. Of course, if you start a paragraph like I just did, everyone reading it knows there's a "but" coming, and yeah, here it comes: this world simply does not feel real. It is not that these measures could not come to pass, it is that the world in toto described in _Our Missing Hearts_ feels at all real.

Part of this is a frankly obnoxious choice in protagonist. Our protagonist, Bird (legal name: Noah), is a twelve year-old boy who has a bad case of litfic kid, by which I mean: at all times, exactly precocious enough to keep the plot moving, and never feeling like a human child. The name "Bird" here also feels twee, which is unfortunate, because there is good thematic grounds for the character's legal name feeling ill-fitting, but going with "Bird" instead of an actual Chinese name (the character is of half Asian descent) feels like a silly way of going about it. But the protagonist feeling unreal helps the rest of the story feel unmoored.

Another part of this is that, while there are protests against the regime and while the book suggests that these protests are ultimately at least a component in bringing down the regime in the future, these are not the sort of protests that actually get the goods. They're art projects mostly, and while protest art is good and important, art does not take down a violent state. This combined with the role libraries play in the book really make it feel like there's rather more interest being paid to a theme than to the realities of life under an authoritarian regime, so the very premise of the book feels wasted.

Also, rather unforgivably, the book doesn't actually contest the idea that the authoritarian measures _worked_. The authoritarian measures were put in place to end the economic crisis, and shortly afterward, the economic crisis ended. Of course, this could be a case of post hoc ergo propter hoc&mdash;the crisis ended after the measures but not because of them&mdash;but Ng doesn't ever actually make that case, so it's perfectly possible to come away from the book thinking "well, those measures were certainly evil, but they did get results and that economic crisis sounds even nastier." The authoritarian measures as described could never have resolved an economic crisis, but to leave that unsaid and unargued strikes me as a moral failing of a book that is sure to explicitly state the official narrative that the authoritarian measures did the job.

Based on what I've read here, Ng is almost certainly an excellent litfic author (at least when not writing children). She writes with style and she certainly handles the tropes of _that_ genre with a deft touch. However, this book is not _in_ that genre, and this particular blend simply doesn't come off.

_I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings_ by Maya Angelou
-------------------------------------------------
It's one of the most lauded works of American autobiography to exist, so the real question here is whether or not I'm going to buck the trend. No, no I am not. This is, quite frankly, the book that we should be assigning in schools instead of _To Kill a Mockingbird_, being an important and vital analysis of race relations and misogyny in the United States during roughly the same time as Harper Lee's book&mdash;except, importantly, rather than the perspective being that of the oppressor class, it's that of the oppressed class. (Also, it's not fictionalized autobiography, as was _To Kill a Mockingbird_.)

I don't think there's very much I can say about this brilliant book that would add to the conversation, I think basically I'm limited to saying that there is always a temptation in autobiographical writing to create a narrative or to force narrative sense into being where none previously existed, and I respect the hell out of Angelou for not doing that at all. This does make the final few chapters&mdash;where Angelou blazes through her pregnancy as a teenager, which comes right out of nowhere&mdash;feel abrupt and disconnected from the rest of what the book seems to have been building to... but life doesn't have to make narrative sense, and it's a bold and honest decision to cop to it.

_Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes_ by Tony Kushner
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Another one where, what, am I supposed to be able to add to the conversation and praise for a seminal work of American writing? Even the aspects of _Angels in America_ that I think don't work are things that Kushner himself agrees aren't quite what they should be. The first part, _Millennium Approaches_ is a tighter and more focused work than _Perestroika_, and while that's to an extent the point[^3], it's messier than that point requires. About three acts into _Perestroika_ (there are five), I was wondering what the _point_ of all this was, but Kushner absolutely sticks the landing, so what do I know?

[^3] Per Kushner, the former is about building to the moment when reality explodes, and the latter is about living in the exploded fragments of the former reality and trying to build a new one. Still, Kushner has retouched _Perestroika_ (which, of course, translates to "restructuring") numerous times since its original performance, so it turns out that being intentionally messy in a coherent way is difficult. Probably not that shocking to hear.

The main problem with reviewing the published script of _Angels in America_ is the obvious one: this is not how the work was meant to be experienced. It's meant to be experienced as theater, so while I can absolutely understand that certain scenes are supposed to have transcendent power (the inhuman angel bursting forth at the end of _Millennium Approaches_ and in the second act of _Perestroika_, most obviously), the script does not and cannot provide them by itself.

But looking at the script, some things genuinely surprised me.

First, _Angels in America_ is very much of a highly specific time and place, but nevertheless feels _painfully_ relevant to today. The AIDS crisis in the United States largely feels resolved at this point[^4] and the Cold War has been over for thirty years, but COVID just hit us (and we're going to have another pandemic in the near-term future, because that's just how this stuff works these days) and the threat of global annihilation has largely shifted from nuclear to climate. The vibes feel about right here, but even beyond that, the political conversations people have in the play feel like they could have been witnessed today.

[^4] To the extent that diabetes has been "resolved" at any rate: we're at the point where, if the country's healthcare system weren't so grotesquely immoral, nobody would die of either disease. Roy Cohn wouldn't die of AIDS in 2023.

Second, I did not expect _Angels in America_ to be as thoroughly Jewish as it is. It is impossible to overstate the Jewishness of the script, which is pretty impressive for a work whose characters are mostly _not_ Jewish and whose main Jewish characters are either irredeemable pieces of shit or else far too close to it for comfort. It is still absolutely impossible for me to imagine that this could have been written by a non-Jew, and one fairly conversant in such things as Holocaust theology at that. I don't agree with Kushner's contention that G-d has abandoned us, but I certainly understand where it comes from.

I want to see a performance of this at some point. Most likely, it'll end up being the HBO miniseries.