November 2023
=============

_Wallenberg_ by Kati Marton
---------------------------
Raoul Wallenberg was a hero: a man who managed to save a large proportion of Budapest's Jews from deportation to Auschwitz or murder in the city by the Arrow Cross. Of the Righteous Among the Nations, his rescue count may well be the highest (although it is probably significantly lower than the six figures it is often quoted as), and his story should be far better known than it is.

The problem with telling that story, however, is that Wallenberg was actually a fairly _boring_ figure outside of that six month period in the Second World War: the scion of a rich family who was living a perfectly ordinary life as a businessman before he went to Budapest and started saving lives. Or at least, that's how he comes across in Marton's biography, which gives very little insight into the man himself and spends a large section of the book trying&mdash;unsuccessfully&mdash;to trace him following his arrest by the Soviet Union in January of 1945.

There's a much better history to be written here than what we got, although the inclusion of the story of Baroness Elizabeth Kem&eacute;ny-Fuchs, who while very pregnant managed to get her collaborator husband to stop interfering with Wallenberg's efforts to save Jews, did teach me someting I didn't already know (and also, there's another biography that sounds fascinating).

_I Have Some Questions For You_ by Rebecca Makkai
-------------------------------------------------
This one had "Harold bait" written all over it. Bodie Kane is a successful podcaster who goes back to her old prep school to teach a class on podcasting. The thing is, her old prep school was the scene of a murder some years ago when Kane was a student there... and the victim was her roommate. The police have their man, but a whole lot of people think they got the wrong guy, including some of Kane's students in the podcasting course.

So the thing that's Harold bait here is _not_ the tie to true crime podcasting, because, by and large, I do not like true crime podcasts. Most people thought that the first season of _Serial_ was the best, but I thought it was the grossest and most exploitative of the lot, and the best was the third.[^1] Rather, Makkai _also_ seems to be a bit skeptical of the genre herself and is trying to parse the ethics of the thing. _That's_ the bait for me.

[^1]: This may be related to my belief that, even if there wasn't enough to reasonably convict him for it and his representation at trial was awful, Adnan was involved in Hae Min Lee's murder.

OK, so that's why I started the book, but was it worth the read? Yes. Yes, it was.

Makkai's best trick here is to make the book narrated by Bodie, but specifically, narrated _to_ her former drama teacher at the school. This gives you a sense that you know both more and less than you actually do about what happened to Bodie's roommate, which makes a mystery with surprisingly few twists and turns feel like it has many, _many_ twists and turns. The exploration of the ethics of true crime as a genre get a thorough investigation, as does how misogyny and racism interact with the genre.

Of course, considering that this was the second Makkai book I had read in as many months, I feel some need to compare it to [_The Great Believers_](202310#the-great-believers-by-rebecca-makkai), and... this comes up a bit short. While _The Great Believers_ dedicates too much space (basically: any at all) to a thoroughly unnecessary plotline, the good plotline in there hits like an atom bomb. _I Have Some Questions For You_ is certainly more even in quality, and that quality is still high... but writing these reviews a month later, it's telling that I had to look up the main character's name here but the names from _The Great Believers_ are seared into my brain. Take that for what it's worth.