September 2023
==============
It was a good month for reading, but also, catching up from the High Holidays has been difficult. Right, let's get to it!

_Chain-Gang All-Stars_ by Nana Kwame Adjei Brenyah
--------------------------------------------------
In the near future, the American penal system has been entirely privatized. It's a hellish ordeal to live in one of the prisons, but there is a way out: participating in Chain-Gang All-Stars, a gladiatorial game that has run for numerous seasons now, and whose top stars, Loretta Dewar and Hurricane Staxx, are lovers on the same team. Can they both make it out alive?

_Chain-Gang All-Stars_ is a very fast read and it's unflinching in its criticism of the American criminal justice system. Brenyah uses footnotes for a variety of purposes in the text, one of them to outline what real-life laws exist to create a truly heinous abomination as the US criminal justice system is. It is also quite large in scope for a fairly compact book: in addition to Loretta and Hurricane, there are numerous other viewpoint characters, including some people who are trying to abolish the games and some people who enjoy watching them.

The largest issue I have with the book is that the main plotline is a bit lumpy, with a few long walks in the desert that admittedly are important from a characterization perspective, but still feel like nothing is really happening and no larger point is being made. It wasn't tedious (again, the characterization is necessary here, and I suppose a break in the action from gladiatorial combat is important for the story to work), but looking back, I feel like there was probably a better way of making it all work.

_The Great Gatsby_ by F Scott Fitzgerald
----------------------------------------
I read this one because The Bashert had just read a queer retelling of the story that sounded like bad published fanfic, and I realized it had been rather a long time since last I read a book I've previously declared perfect. So I re-read _The Great Gatsby_ and I feel no real need to qualify my earlier statement. This being said, I'm not really sure how I missed, the last time I read the book, just how crappy a person the narrator, Nick, is. Some of that is clearly a result of having gone through the First World War, but even so, his detachment from humanity was wildly disconcerting to me this time out in a way I don't remember from the last time.

It is also a massive indictment of our society that Tom Buchanan remains a relevant critique of it.

_Yellowface_ by R F Kuang
-------------------------
Juniper is the only one there when Athena Liu, a fellow (but much, much more highly-regarded) author dies. Juniper is the only one who knows that Athena's manuscript is complete, so she steals it, edits it, and submits it as her own work. The thing is, Athena was a Chinese-American writing about Chinese laborers in the First World War and Juniper is very, very, very white... and just how much is Juniper willing to do to publish the manuscript and defend herself against accusations of cultural appropriation, racism, and plagiarism?

And let me tell you, this book is a treat. It's a horror story where our narrator is an unrelentingly awful person doing unforgivable things, a monster story told from the perspective of the monster, not that she's the only one to be found here. The indictments fly fast and furious: at a racist publishing industry that is only barely willing to do the absolute minimum to _look_ like it values diversity; at hack tropes in storytelling that are themselves drenched in racism; at thought-leaders more interested in their own clout and bringing others low than in actually changing the system; and, in a move that I think elevates the novel to a whole new level, at those writers who insist that everything in their life is copy without considering what that turns the other people in their life into. There is a villain here, but there are no saints, and Kuang's willingness to go for harder targets in addition to the soft ones easily makes this one of the best books I've read this year. Strongly recommended for all.

_The Bar Mitzvah Murder_ by Lee Harris
--------------------------------------
There was quite a bit about this book that irked me. First, it was a rather poorly-constructed mystery where it was easy to guess the perpetrator thanks to an economy of characters, but basically impossible to figure out the mechanics of the crime. Second, the book spent vast amounts of time not focusing on the mystery, instead serving as a travel guide of Israel, and not a particularly interesting or thematically relevant one at that.[^1] So while a man being murdered is ostensibly the point, basically nobody seems to be acting like it: there's a reason Poirot didn't go for a trip down to Mero&euml; after the murder took place in _Death on the Nile_ but before he'd unmasked the killer.

[^1]: It's only fair for me to say that the book was clearly written by a Christian who very much wanted to tell other Christians what she'd learned from her Jewish friends about Judaism and Israel. I am very much not in the target audience for that, and while I don't remember anything wildly insensitive here, I do remember it being exceptionally tedious. Also, the past is another country, because the book was published a little more than two decades ago and seems to believe nobody has heard of hummus. May have been true at the time, just reads as astonishingly weird now how the characters can't get over how different hummus is.

Now, this is a "cozy mystery," so some of that may be viewed as table stakes. But this isn't my first go-round with cozy mysteries, and I've liked others: the Number One Ladies Detective Agency novels by Alexander McCall Smith are delightful. But the tonal dissonance, tedium, and poor construction of the mystery in _The Bar Mitzvah Murder_ make for a mediocre read at best.

_Between Two Moons_ by Aisha Abdel Gawad
----------------------------------------
A young Muslim woman comes of age in Bay Ridge. That's the premise, and I'd be hard-pressed to say there's a proper "plot" in it. Certainly things happen and there is a story (it's a bildungsroman, coming of age IS the story), but there's not really a solid plot here.

And that's fine. _Between Two Moons_ is an expertly painted character study, a fascinating look at the Muslim Arab-American community in Bay Ridge, and a righteously angry denunciation of the racism and Islamophobia (including on an official level) that community faces. The book ends a little abruptly, but I don't think there's an easy endpoint here that would keep the focus on the main character, and again, since the plot is pretty loose, just cutting off doesn't hurt the book at all and lets it end on an emotional highpoint.

_My Map of You_ by Isabelle Broom
---------------------------------
On the one hand, I should appreciate a romance novel that is trying to do a bit more than the bare minimum with the genre of "going off to some exotic location to find yourself and, incidentally, some sex." _My Map of You_ is trying to make important points and shade its characters more realistically than what one could find in a Harlequin romance novel.

It's a pity, then, that I spent most of the book wishing the author had just done the bare minimum. The themes here are introduced but never properly developed, the conflicts are far larger than their perfunctory conclusions, and our lead character is a genuinely awful partner to her boyfriend who, although a bit dim and provincial, in no way deserves what she puts him through. And okay, nothing wrong with a reprehensible protagonist, but you've got to do something with that, and hoo boy does Broom not.

At a hundred or hundred fifty pages shorter, this would have been a perfectly fine if utterly disposable wish fulfillment story about finding love with a hunky Irish vet on a Greek island. As is, well, it's still utterly disposable.

_Counterfeit_ by Kristin Chen
-----------------------------
_Counterfeit_ is the story of Ava, a Chinese-American former corporate lawyer who gave it up to become a stay-at-home mother and her former college roommate, Winnie, who now works in the counterfeit handbag business. Ava slowly finds herself getting sucked into Winnie's orbit, but then Winnie disappears, very literally leaving Ava holding the bag.

I wanted to like _Counterfeit_ more than I did. It's good, but it feels a little lightweight. I felt it fell short of the potential of the premise. Unfortunately, in order to explain why, I need to get into mild spoiler territory, so if you don't want that, just know that if the premise sounded interesting to you and you're fine with "fast read, not too memorable," you'll probably think it's fine, although I found the ending highly disappointing.

I'm now going to throw in some additional text here so that the mild spoilers aren't the first thing you see.

_Counterfeit_'s conceit is that it is Ava's police interview. It's a neat littleway of going about things, because while the default is to assume that our narrator is telling the truth, well, there's enough weirdness in the story to have some serious questions about the reliability of our narrator. Now, I adore a good unreliable narrator story, and if you're looking for that, I recommend Ford Maddox Ford's _The Good Soldier_, a book where it takes a while to figure out exactly what the story actually was, but where by the end you know that the narrator has lied to you about practically everything but you still know what happened. It's extremely elegant.

What is _not_ elegant is deciding that, halfway through the book, you can't figure out how to get the audience to the real story, so you break to a third-person limited narration and call it a day.

I also wasn't exactly a fan of the novel's themes. Arguing that America is a land of grifters? Yep, that's true. Pointing out that counterfeit handbags aren't morally objectionable if basically nobody can tell the difference? Hey, I'm not arguing. But I would expect this to lead into some argument about the need to dismantle the system, not a celebration of getting yours in it.