August 2023
===========
Yeah, I know I'm a bit late in getting this one up, but hey, still doing it! Not a great month for reading, but September's shaping up a bit more promisingly.

_Soonish_ by Kelly and Zach Weinersmith
---------------------------------------
I've been reading the webcomic [Saturday Morning Breakfast Cereal](https://smbc-comics.com) for a few years, so when this book basically landed in my lap, I thought I'd give it a shot. As I would have expected from the webcomic, it's a funny and smart book, and a well-researched look at promising technologies that seem to be possible not now, but in the near future, as the title suggests. This being said, either the authors or I were far more interested in the large scale technologies than the smaller medical ones (not ruling out the answer is "both"), because those chapters seemed to be the best of the lot to me. Nothing bad here, but honestly, it felt a bit longer than it needed to be. Ironically, this was not the fault of the "chapters we couldn't in good conscience keep in the book" section.

_Coming of Age in Samoa_ by Margaret Mead
-----------------------------------------
This is an unquestionably important work in the history of anthropology and ethnography. I cannot speak to its accuracy, which has been a matter of controversy for decades, with both other academics and the Samoans themselves contesting various points in the text.

But what I can say is... hoo boy, as important a text as it might be in its field, I didn't think it aged at all well.

The premise of the book as set out in Mead's introduction is that it attempts to determine if childhood in the US of the time was uniquely neurotic by examining a less developed culture and seeing how childhood development proceeds there. I'm not quoting Mead directly with that, but I don't believe I'm misrepresenting the general valence with that statement. Now, I don't disagree with the concept of going elsewhere to better understand one's own culture (or at least the assumptions one's own culture makes), but there is a decided element of "historical progression" present in the book that is deeply uncomfortable. I can't say as I would recommend reading it unless the history of the field of anthropology is interesting to you.
