October 2023
============
October was another pretty good month.

_A Brief History of Living Forever_ by Jaroslav Kalfa&rcaron;
-------------------------------------------------------------
In the near future, the US has fallen under fascist dictatorship, Europe is a patchwork of highly reactionary states, and human immortality is just over the horizon. Our narrator, Ad&eacute;la, travels from Czechia to visit Tereza, the daughter she's never met before, only to die shortly thereafter... and then continue narrating the book.

Kalfa&rcaron;'s work here paints a frighteningly plausible future of the world (with some minor hiccups: although no names are used, it appears he thought DeSantis would do better in the primaries than DeSantis did), and the world-building, characters, and narration are really top-notch. The plot, however, generally feels a bit thin&mdash;although that hardly stops the ending from packing a wallop.

_The Future of Another Timeline_ by Annalee Newitz
--------------------------------------------------
In Newitz' novel, time travel portals exist, and both a (trans-affirming) feminist collective and a fascist faction are fighting to make (and un-make) changes to the timeline to make a better world in the case of the feminists and a much, much worse one in the case of the fascists. Also, a young woman comes of age in a timeline where abortion is illegal.

Of the two plotlines, I found the coming-of-age story by far the more interesting of the two, in stark contrast to my wife, who found the time travellers to be the more engaging. Considering I'm usually far, far, _far_ more into science fiction than she is, this was a bit of a surprise to us both, but in retrospect, it probably should not have been. If you're not into science fiction as a genre, the time travel here is going to feel a lot fresher than if you're not. Frankly, the story of a teenage girl in a society where abortion is illegal is probably going to feel a whole lot less fresh to people more inclined to reading women's memoirs from a half century ago or more than I am.

Now, neither of the two plotlines is anything less than good, it should be noted, and Newitz's general reluctance to make grand statements about Life, The Universe, and Everything makes for a thematically richer experience than the easier road would be. All told, it's good, and if it's only flaw is that I don't view it as a classic, that's a pretty minor flaw to have.

_The Great Believers_ by Rebecca Makkai
---------------------------------------
Another case of two plotlines in one book. In the first timeline, Yale is living through the apocalypse that was the AIDS crisis in 1980's Chicago. In the second time, his best friend is looking for her daughter in Paris twenty years later. The first plotline is a spectacular tour-de-force. The second plotline is also there.

I want to be kinder about that second plotline. There is absolutely something valuable in discussing the trauma (including generational) survivors of plagues will suffer, but ultimately, I do not think that the Paris plotline gets there. It tries, but it just doesn't get there in the end, and I think Makkai knew it, because these chapters tend to be significantly shorter than the Chicago chapters.

But the Chicago chapters are just so good that it doesn't matter, you gotta read the book. Not having lived through the gay scene in 1980's Chicago, I cannot say how accurate Makkai's depiction of that scene is, but she certainly nails the feel of living through Armageddon, with death as a constant presence, always trying to force its way into everything... and what do you _do_ when that's your life? What _matters_ under such circumstances?

So by plotlines, it's half of an all-time classic, and by page count, somewhere between two-thirds and three-fourths of one. Worth checking out, certainly.

_The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian_ by Sherman Alexie
-------------------------------------------------------------------
I think I need to drop a disclaimer up top here that Sherman Alexie has been accused of, and admitted to, sexual harrassment. This may have some bearing on whether or not you want to read this book, and if you do choose to read it, how you go about procuring a copy. I am also going to say right now that, although I am not making a conscious effort to separate the art from the artist, my review of this book is not going to discuss the artist much, if at all, because I know very little about Alexie except the allegations.

I have read another book from Alexie, _The Long Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven_, and this one's dealing with similar themes and topics: coming of age as a Spokane Indian in western Washington. However, the obvious and massive point of departure between the two is the concept of "getting out": _Fistfight_ isn't all that interested in it, where this (and Alexie's ambivalence towards it) is the primary focus of _Diary_. I think this focus, which is necessarily more interested in the outside (read: white) world, ends up making _Diary_ a more accessible text, although I should also note that _Diary_ is also explicitly aimed at a yougner audience.

That doesn't make it a less challenging text, though. Early on in the book, the protagonist, Junior, is told by his white teacher on the reservation that (1) the teacher regrets having had the residential school mentality of "kill the Indian to save the man" and (2) Junior has to get off the reservation or he'll end up tragically dead. The book never explicitly states that these points are in conflict: Junior leaving the reservation means that, in a very real way, he will have to stop living as a Spokane Indian. The question is: what is the cost, is it worth paying, and what's the cost of _not_ doing it?

And this extrememly nuanced exploration of getting off the reservation in a way that is accessible to middle schoolers? It's an impressive accomplishment, even though the person who did it is a massive creep.
