April 2023
==========

This was a _really_ good month for reading. No outright duds, some absolute bangers. Can't ask for much more than that.

_Steve Jobs_ by Walter Isaacson
-------------------------------
The problem with reviewing a biography is that, if you're only familiar with the general shape of the person's life, then you can't really testify to its accuracy, and if you've only read the one biography of an individual, then you're only getting the one narrative of their life. I suppose this is true of non-fiction more generally, which leads to the question: is it enough to find the narrative compelling if you cannot testify as to its accuracy? In fiction, this is obviously no worry at all, but in the case of non-fiction, do we owe the subjects more than saying that the one perspective was interesting regardless of what that subject may have had to say about it?

Point being, I didn't know very much about Steve Jobs going into this, and most of what I did know, I did not like. I left this biography still thinking rather poorly of Jobs as a person, but I did come to appreciate exactly what he did for Apple, Pixar, and basically for the past thirty years of culture globally. There are points where I think Isaacson buys a little too far into the cult of Apple (I do not believe the iPad was a brilliant innovation, Isaacson feels like he's selling that idea), but in Isaacson's telling of history, Jobs comes across as a world-class jerk who had exceptionally good taste, an ability to spot and mobilize talent, and a vision for where he wanted the future to go. The latter doesn't excuse or justify the former, but I did not expect to coming out of the biography feeling impressed with Jobs (Jobs' imitators have done him a tremendous disservice in this regard, among many others), and well, I admit to having a bit of a grudging respect for him now.

_Aviva and the Dybbuk_ by Mari Lowe
-----------------------------------
The story of a middle-school girl who lives with her mother above a mikveh (a Jewish ritual bath) ever since the death of her father five years ago, _Aviva and the Dybbuk_ is a short book that packs a wallop. Aviva's life was understandably turned upside down by the death of her father and the move, and has ever since seen a dybbuk, a mischievous spirit from Jewish folklore. She's not doing well despite her protestations to the contrary.

I don't think anything in _Aviva and the Dybbuk_ surprised me. There are some reelations toward the end of the book that I saw coming from very, very early on. If they were _intended_ as a twist, then I don't think they really work as such, but the good news is that they don't need to. The book isn't a mystery novel and its joys (not inconsiderable) lie not in the machinations of its plot (of which there isn't very much) or even in the expertly parceled-out backstory, but rather, in Aviva's narration and her interactions with the other characters. It's a lovely little book.

_Telluria_ by Vladimir Sorokin
------------------------------
I don't even know, man. _Telluria_ is set in a world where pounding nails of special Tellurium into specific spots in your skull will allow you to see other possible worlds (or even aspects of this one), and also Russia and Europe have splintered apart, there's something weird going on where the Taliban have invaded part of Germany (and that's not the only Muslim invasion of Europe that's happened) and... there's a lot. And from this, you do not get a coherent narrative, you just get fifty short stories set in this world, with basically no repeating characters.

It is a trip, and I have very little idea of what to make of it. I think I'm probably contractually obligated to mention that one of the short stories is narrated by an anthropomorphic phallus who is part of a harem of anthropomorphic phalluses, but other memorable highlights include a trip to the Ultra-Stalinist Soviet Socialist Republic (a tourist hotspot), a day in the life of the skydiving president of the Republic of Telluria, and a letter requesting exemption from the religious ban on Tellurium so that the petitioner can speak to his dead relative and get some information that will save his business.

Again, I don't really know what to make of it, but I am very glad I read it and if you're up for fifty highly distinct views of this particular world, strongly recommended.

_Welcome to the Goddamn Ice Cube_ by Blair Braverman
----------------------------------------------------
I suspect this one suffered by being compared to _Telluria_ before it, but I thought this memoir of Braverman's time in the Arctic and her crap experiences with patriarchy there never quite came together. With a title like that, I was expecting something a bit funnier or punchier, and this, despite the title and subject matter, felt like a pretty sedate affair, with the Arctic and the patriarchy never quite seeming to fit very well together except insofar as she lived it.

And, like, I get it: real life is messy and doesn't always cohere. You're not always going to get a clear narrative out of it. The thing is, though, that's a cheap excuse because it's basically the job of the memoirist to take all that weird crap that doesn't fit together and selectively mine it to _get_ that coherent narrative.

_Welcome to the Goddamn Ice Cube_ isn't a bad book, and if you're into memoirs more than I am (they're generally not my favorite genre), it may be worth a read for the unique setting and some of the episodes. As is, this wasn't really my thing.

_A Deadly Education_ by Naomi Novik
-----------------------------------
So if you're going to do a Chosen One narrative set in a school of magic, this is how you want to do it. El is a junior in the Scholomance, a school of magic where the vast majority of students die either during their time at the school or during their graduation ceremony&mdash;and yet, it's still a far safer place to be than in the outside world, where the monsters (called maleficaria) can and will attack at any time. El is an outsider, but when the class hero, Orion, saves her life, she starts getting far more drawn into the class' social dynamics... and even though she knows they're messed up going in, they're worse than she even expected.

_A Deadly Education_ is the first book in a trilogy and is doing a LOT of setup for what's to come, but I was very much digging what it was doing and what it was setting up. Novik's magical world is one of breathtaking inequality as seen from the very bottom, but it's not a moralistic tale so much as it one of materialist analysis of a very, very broken and classist world. A lot of really heinous shit gets done here, and it's not because most of the characters doing it are evil, it's because their choices are either to do the evil or to dramatically reduce their chances of survival. Do or die, and use every possible advantage you have along the way.

I'm really looking forward to reading the next two volumens in the trilogy, which has basically nothing to do with the very obvious (and honestly kinda hackneyed) sequel hook at the very end of the book and everything to do with the worldbuilding and characters.

_Day of the Oprichnik_ by Vladimir Sorokin
------------------------------------------
So... content warning on this one, because there's a fair bit of violence, including against animals and sexual violence against women.

_Day of the Oprichnik_ is set in 2028 in a Russia where the Tsar is back as are Ivan the Terrible's secret police, the Oprichnina. Our protagonist, Komiaga, is a member of that organization, and throughout the day, we see him engage in his duties, which involve terrorizing and robbing the general population and extracting as much money as possible out of the clearly much richer Chinese commercial interests in the country.

Now, if you just read this one by itself in English translation and without familiarity with much of the context, you're going to miss a lot. Sorokin is apparently parodying a far right utopian text by a White general from the Russian Civil War that has become popular in Russia in recent years, and while the translator tries to translate the folksy narration style, I'd never have picked up on the extent it's apparently done in the original text if I hadn't read the Wikipedia article.

So, without being able to follow Sorokin's intertextuality here, is the book still worth reading? Yes, I think so. Sorokin's Oprichniki are depraved people who have basically surrendered their liberty and their individuality in exchange for drugs, preferential treatment in traffic law, and the permit to do a whole lot of violence, which... okay, not that much _fun_ to read, but certainly _interesting_.

I don't think of the book as being particularly prescient (a bit more than _Telluria_, but not by much), but the general strokes of Russia collapsing into ultranationalist autocracy and being propped up by Chinese money? Yeah, that does not feel _unfamiliar_ in this day and age.

(Also, I don't know if this is an issue in translation or not, but Sorokin's works have seemed to be pretty merciless in mocking Russian xenophobia while also maybe engaging in it. Since it's two different translators, it kind of seems like Sorokin lost a bit of control of his own narrative and started engaging in the thing he was satirizing.)

_Bullshit Jobs_ by David Graeber
--------------------------------
This was my first time reading Graeber, which feels like it should be a bit of an embarrassing confession for a contemporary anarchist. Well, whether or not I should have gotten to it before, I've gotten to his works now, and I must say: this might be the best book I read this year.

Graeber's basic contention is that a large proportion of the jobs out there are bullshit: they don't provide any value and are acknowledge as such by the people who do those same jobs. It turns out that surveys bear this out to the tune of about 40% of all jobs, which raises so very many questions including:

- Can we come up with a meaningful classification scheme for bullshit jobs?
- What does having a bullshit job do to the person who works it?
- Why do bullshit jobs exist?
- How can we get rid of bullshit jobs?

Of course, Graeber explores all of these questions and more, including a discussion of the concept of "value" versus the concept of "values" that both rocked my world and helped me articulate why I find conversations regarding the definition of the former so very boring if not pointless. And, as one might have guessed from the no-nonsense title, Graeber does all of this with a refreshingly readable and witty style that cuts right through the guff.

Of course, a fair bit of this really was just confirmation that stuff I'd had experience with was boringly unexceptional. I feel comfortable saying my first full-time job out of college was basically textbook bullshit, most easily demonstrated by saying that it took _months_ for the company to give me, a software developer, a computer. Things did not get altogether much better from there. It's not nice, _per se_, to know that this is common, but it certainly validates my suspicions on that front. On the other hand, it is very nice, _per se_, to know that we don't have to live in such a pointless manner.