December 2023
=============
Well, it was a _productive_ month for reading, but nothing really classic here.


_Rules for Radicals_ by Saul Alinsky
------------------------------------
If you're at all familiar with right wing cranks, the title of this book and the name of its author are almost certainly familiar: this is the book they believe motivates the American left wing, by which they mean anyone to the left of Francisco Franco Bahamonde. If you're actually _in_ that section of the population, however, you're probably not all that familiar with the book.

This is probably for several reasons, among them that it's not particularly interesting to read, it's been proven to be of limited applicability, and for all that the author claimed to be a radical, it's quite difficult to see him as such and honestly probably was at the time. You don't quote Tocqueville that much if you're all that radical. Instead, it's basically been partly adopted by the right wing as a means of doing organizing, and because we're talking about right wing organizing, it doesn't matter how crud those tactics are are fostering solidarity. Perhaps some of my criticism comes from living downstream of a world it maybe helped create, but either way, this just doesn't feel all that necessary.

_Jurassic Park_ by Michael Crichton
-----------------------------------
So the obvious question here is: how does it compare to the movie? And the answer is, quite simply, Spielberg's 1993 film is much, much better. Crichton had an all-time great premise with this book, but the execution leaves quite a bit to be desired.

But before we get to the bad stuff, let's talk about the good: _some_ aspects of the book have aged perfectly. Crichton's critique of the economics of innovation have only become more relevant as Silicon Valley has loomed larger and larger in the cultural imagination (and in market capitalizations), and his vision of how a park where genetic engineering brings dinosaurs back to life&mdash;namely, one built as cheaply and quickly as humanly possible by, in part, flat-out lying to investors&mdash;is unquestionably how it _would_ happen were it to happen at all. Combine that with his critique of engineers believing the hype about their own tech to disastrous effect, and yeah, Crichton was very much onto something here.[^1]

[^1]: Unfortunately, it was basically this exact form of skepticism that would lead Crichton to become a climate change denier at the end of his life. I think his mistake of overgeneralization of his critique could easily have been avoided had he engaged in greater material analysis of the issues at hand, but he didn't and that's where we are.

But _Jurassic Park_ isn't a particularly good book. The pacing is trash (it's far too slow to start, and it drags on interminably during both a river sequence that does not end and in a pointless excursion to a velociraptor nest after the story is effectively over), the characters barely rise to the level of cardboard, and there's a fair bit of misogyny in play. The thing is, Crichton had quite possibly the best story idea anyone had in pulp fiction for fifty years, but nowhere near the talent or heart required to make it sing. Absent the critique of Silicon Valley, there'd be no reason to revisit the book thirty years later when the film is right there.

_Eat, Pray, Love_ by Elizabeth Gilbert
--------------------------------------
It is fair to point out that I was not the target demographic for _Eat, Pray, Love_, and that the hottest travel memoirs of 2006 were probably not going to age exceptionally well over the following twenty years. Fine, let's accept those as table stakes. Knowing this and being willing to place the book in the context in which it was written, was it good?

Well, I'd be hard-pressed to say it was _good_, but _fine_ probably covers it.

Basically, Gilbert nukes her life by leaving her husband for another man with whom it doesn't work out, then gets an advance from her publisher to spend four months living in Italy to eat and learn Italian, another four living in India to pursue enlightenment, and a third four living in Indonesia having been invited there by a holy man. If you can't read that summary without rolling your eyes and the privilege required to pull that off&mdash;for what it's worth, I didn't roll mine&mdash;you may enjoy _Eat, Pray, Love_, but if not... well, it's not going to get _less_ rough.

Of the three sections, Italy feels by far the least essential. She learns Italian, eats, and theoretically heals from the turmoil of the preceding year or so of her personal life, but the elisions made in _telling_ the story of that preceding time kinda make the healing feel unnecessary. Gilbert is clearly going for profundity with the India section, although frankly, not sure she makes it and it's honestly kinda weird how little _Indians_ figure into a story about her engagement with Indian spirituality: her main spiritual leader is "Richard from Texas." The final section is theoretically a synthesis of what's come before, but the love affair doesn't really feel all that important and Gilbert's descriptions of her own interactions with the Balinese reek of noble savage and white savior tropes.

What makes any of this work at all is that Gilbert is, if not a profound writer, then certainly an entertaining one. I don't think Gilbert _intended_ to write a beach book, but there are worse things in the world than reading one.

_Bodega Dreams_ by Ernesto Qui&ntilde;onez
------------------------------------------
The short pitch on this is that _Bodega Dreams_ is _The Great Gatsby_ transplanted to Spanish Harlem more than half a century later. However, this sells _Bodega Dreams_ rather short. Yes, Qui&ntilde;onez' plot unquestionably cribs from Fitzgerald and there are rather more references to green light than would allow anyone to consider this coincidental. This being said, Qui&ntilde;onez' preoccupations are wildly different from Fitzgerald's to the point where I'm not entirely sure _why_ Qui&ntilde;onez chose to crib the plot in the first place.

As an example, Jay Gatsby is a criminal with basically one aim: winning over Daisy Buchanan to the point where he can rewrite the past to say that she has _always_ been with him. The Gatsby figure in _Bodega Dreams_, Willie, is a former Young Lord who may have given up that affiliation, but never gave up the aims of that socially conscious group even as he still pines after Veronica. The plot and thematic ramifications of this change are massive, particularly at the end. I don't dislike what Qui&ntilde;onez did here, and the book feels both gripping and essential, but I'm still not sure _why_ the Gatsby plot got reused.

The way I see it, if you can re-tell _The Great Gatsby_ and make it feel like a non-masturbatory exercise, you've pulled off something quite remarkable, so yeah, give this one a read.

_The Devil and Webster_ by Jean Hanff Korelitz
----------------------------------------------
There is absolutely room in the world for a satire of identity politics and their operation in the world of American universities, which is to say: of the blatant cynicism and complete lack of good faith American universities have with regards to identity politics. DEI and other such initiatives are in place not because anyone at the top believes in them, but because it's pure ass-covering designed to prevent any messy PR disasters from deservedly slamming into the school, and virtue-signalling on the part of professors who turn into Evola groupies the second their parking spaces are threatened. In other words, a vicious Juvenalian affair coming from the left.

_The Devil and Webster_ is not that. It is the story of a university president dealing with unjustified student protests of the denial of tenure to a tenure-track professor who barely published and what little he published turned out to be plagiarized. The students can't be told this thanks to some legal requirements, and the whole thing turns into a circus the put-upon liberal president with her heart in the right place can't quite figure out how to handle.

I don't think the intention here was to write a right-wing attack on identity politics, but that is largely the result. It's certainly better-written than I would expect from the plot and critique, and there's a surprise or two thrown in that I didn't see coming (but which reinforce my problems with the book), but this really wasn't for me.

_The Conquest of Bread_ by Pyotr Kropotkin
------------------------------------------
Ah, The Bread Book. Well, I started out by reading this aloud to my toddler son, but now that he finds my cell phone fascinating and can't be trusted not to rip paper books (board books are fine), I ended up finishing the last couple of chapters without him. We'll find something a bit more age-appropriate for him now that he actually pays attention to books and isn't just in the room for someone reading.

So, is The Bread Book still worth a read?

I'd say so, yes. It does a great job of making a moral and practical case for anarcho-communism, and although it ends with perhaps _too_ practical an argument (those agricultural numbers are obviously quite out-of-date and probably weren't much of a page-turner back in 1892), those particulars make it all the more clear that anarcho-communism is hardly an impractical or utopian endeavor. This, of course, is not an argument that needed to be made to me&mdash;preaching to the converted and all that&mdash;but the book still very much holds up and remains an excellent entry point to anarchist theory and praxis.
