June 2023
=========
Overall good, but some disappointments and oddities here.

_Everfair_ by Nisi Shawl
------------------------
What if, in the late nineteenth century, a group of British Fabian Society-types and American Colonization Society-types came together and bought some of King Leopold's colony in the Congo, and then set up a new country there working in tandem with the indigenous peoples? And during the inevitable conflict with Leopold's Congo, they didn't lose? And what if the person writing this story didn't marginalize the indigenous peoples or make them look stupid, thus committing a different kind of colonialism? Wouldn't that be awesome?

Given _Everfair_'s premise, which was basically everything I wanted to see out of an alternative history novel&mdash;could have gone without the steampunk elements, not going to lie about that, but so it goes&mdash;I was massively disappointed with the book it turned out to be. Shawl goes through decades of alternative history with a pretty wide cast of characters in less than 400 pages. I'm not saying I need books to be long, but the result of the history being so impactful and eventful and the bench being so deep, very little of it actually was registering with me by the end, and events that should have felt cataclysmic&mdash;the First World War, for example&mdash;just kind of pass by on the breeze. It feels more like a series of sketches than a proper story, which struck me as an unforgivable waste of the premise.

Slash the viewpoint characters to the lesbian couple and the indigenous queen at the core of this story, or else slash the timeframe portrayed to at most a decade and there's a stone-cold classic here. As is, I'm pretty sure there's a sequel due out for this one, but I can't really see myself bothering.

_Bleed_ by Tracey Lindeman
--------------------------
I was, prior to reading this book, rather badly misinformed about endometriosis. Turns out, so's a lot of the medical establishment, so at least I'm in good company!

Based on the previous paragraph, you can probably guess that, while _Bleed_ does give a fair bit of information regarding the disease of endometriosis and the treatment of the same, most of what it's discussing is the utter failure of the medical system to actually treat the disease. And for those who might assume that this is going to be a castigation of the US' for-profit system, well... yes, okay, it is partially that, but Lindeman is a Canadian and it's not as though the Canadian system isn't _also_ grossly distorted by capitalist nonsense and evil.

Also so much misogyny. And fatphobia.

Lindeman's dealing with a tricky&mdash;and personal&mdash;subject, but is a highly talented writer, so while, like the Hulk, she's always angry, she's never an iota off the point nor does her anger wear the reader out. She's very, very funny at points in an exceedingly morbid way, so although I didn't expect to laugh while reading about someone desperately seeking a hysterectomy to reduce endometriosis pain, hey, turns out, sometimes it's funny. That's not to say it's a laugh-a-minute&mdash;it is very much not&mdash;but Lindeman's a master of tone and of conveying information.

If you do not have endometriosis, you need to read this. If you do have it, I imagine it might get extremely triggering, but it might actually also be cathartic seeing how many other people are going through the same hell or potentially even worse. 

_Everything Flows_ by Vasily Grossman
-------------------------------------
I discovered Grossman about two-and-a-half years ago when a local bookshop was selling remaindered copies of his doorstopper of a novel, _Stalingrad_. Two weeks later, I was back for a copy for the sequel, _Life and Fate_, at which point, I decided that Grossman was my favorite Russian author. I don't think anyone who knows me will be surprised that a Jewish socialist (but not Stalinist)[^1] ex-engineer author who loved the works of Tolstoy had such an effect on me. That said, after about 2000 pages of his writing, I thought I should take a bit of a break.

[^1]: It's a _little_ more complicated than that. Basically, Grossman toed the party line until the war ended, at which point Stalin decided to start purging Jews, and then rediscovered his sense of Jewishness during the campaign against cosmopolitanism, at which point the scales fell from his eyes regarding the abuses of the Stalinist regime, and he started denouncing _all_ the abuses.

I'm not sorry I did, because I doubt I'd have appreciated _Everything Flows_ quite as much. The scope is comparatively small: Ivan comes back from nearly thirty years in the Gulag and reintegrates back into society without much drama. It's a short book, during which time Ivan is at peace and basically everyone else is at least somewhat discomfited: the people who didn't try that hard to stay in contact with him, the person who informed on him, his landlady who participated in the Holodomor, everyone. Grossman judges no individual, and yet condemns everyone by pointing out that those who were present _did_ have good reason for acting as they did during The Great Terror... and yet, the madness came from _somewhere_. A formally inventive work where basically everyone understands just how badly they failed (Ivan basically excepted). At about 200 pages, this one's a fast read, but it _will_ stick with you, especially the harrowing Holodomor section.

(Also, if you're reading the NYRB Classics edition, they appear to have messed up and not actually specified the footnotes in the text itself. The notes are there, they're just not referenced in the text itself. This is a problem if you're not familiar with the era.)

_The Shock Doctrine_ by Naomi Klein
-----------------------------------
This one felt like a real gap in my reading considering how often I saw it referenced, so I finally got down to business and read it. Unsurprisingly, I'm siding with the consensus here: _The Shock Doctrine_ is a necessary and vital book that shows exactly how neoliberalism relies on violence, both naturally-occurring and otherwise, to enact "reforms." What gets reformed? The wealth pyramid of the country to something even more concave? Would the population vote for these "reforms"? Of course not, they never do. And yet the things keep happening along with a lot of violence, so...

Look, just read the book, and end both the IMF and the World Bank.

_American Born Chinese_ by Gene Luen Yang
-----------------------------------------
This one's gonna be weird.

_American Born Chinese_ is a graphic novel about the second-generation Chinese immigrant experience in America. It's split across three stories: one is a retelling of a decent-sized chunk of the classic Chinese novel _Journey to the West_, one is the story of a boy named Jin Wang who is the target of both actively malicious and passive unthinking racism at his middle school, and the third is about Danny, a popular basketball player, dealing with the visit of his stereotypical Chinese cousin.

The novel is raw and angry&mdash;deservedly so, given the subject matter. The double-consciouness of feeling American while also feeling very much _not_ is something that, as an easily identifiable Orthodox Jewish man, I can and do sympathize with. But there are two aspects of this otherwise excellent book that really made me feel almost too uncomfortable to keep going.

The first is that stereotypical Chinese cousin. His name is Chin-Kee, and whatever buck-toothed, leering, racist caricature you have in your mind, Chin-Kee is probably (hopefully?) worse. There is a valuable point being made about internalized racism here, but it is _wildly_ uncomfortable to read at the best of times, and I found it genuinely unreadable at the worst. The author is of Chinese descent so if this is anyone's set of tools, fair enough, but as a reader, it can get to be genuinely nauseating.

The second is a rather important change made to _Journey to the West_. Again, it is not my place to say that someone of Chinese descent making adaptational changes to _Journey to the West_ should not do so, but the changes made are to take Buddha out of it and replace Buddha with the Christian god. The quest to retrieve Buddhist sutras from India becomes a quest to give three gifts to baby Jesus. There's also a recurring and somewhat obscure reference to Cherubim. Without delving into meatier analysis that would necessarily become a question of whether or not the adaptational changes should have been made, let me just say that I am very much not a fan of seeing old and highly regarded non-Christian stories get a Christian reworking for the happiness of either the adapter or the audience. The changes are small and amount to a very small amount of the book, but I would be lying if I said that I haven't given those changes more thought than the rest of the text combined.

You can call that a disservice to the book as a whole, and I can't say as I'd disagree with you: it's a good book with important things to say! But I'd be hard-pressed to say what the adaptational changes to _Journey to the West_ do in terms of commenting on the themes of _American Born Chinese_, and it was a colossal distraction. For those less theologically literate, I doubt this will get clocked (well, not until the delivery of the gifts to Jesus, at any rate), and even though this threw me hard and did unfortunately rather hamper my enjoyment of the book (as much as one can "enjoy" a book about living in a racist society and being the target), I'd still recommend it.
