January 2024
============

_Shantaram_ by Gregory David Roberts
------------------------------------
Late last year, I read [_Eat, Pray, Love_](202312#eat%2c-pray%2c-love-by-elizabeth-gilbert), in which a white person goes to India in no small part to find herself. I think it was pretty fitting that I ended up reading _Shantaram_ shortly thereafter, because it is a book about a white person who goes to India and it's about how he found himself there.

I cannot in good conscience recommend _Shantaram_. It is a 933 page behemoth, the prose is purple, the characters are thin, and the plot rambling and poorly-constructed at best.[^1] There's probably an excellent conversation to be had about the racial dynamics of the text, but there does seem to be a tendency toward stereotype, and a whole lot of noble savage kind of stuff there. If you were to ask me for my critical opinion of _Shantaram_, I would say that it is a bad book.

[^1]: There seems to be a general agreement among the readership of the book that it is the fictionalized memoirs of the author. Although the author's bio on the back of the book has definite parallels with the story contained within, I suspect it's the plot of _Shantaram_ that really seals the deal because it only _barely_ passes as a coherent narrative.

If you were to ask me if I enjoyed it in the spirit it was intended to be enjoyed, I would also have to say yes.

Yes, it's a shamelessly manipulative book that doesn't remotely earn its emotional beats, and its flaws as literature are both myriad and easily-observed, and yet... there is something about _Shantaram_ that I could not help but be drawn to, and even if those beats aren't earned, dang it if they didn't still land for me all the same. The critic in me wishes I didn't like _Shantaram_ as much as I did, but I'd be lying if I said I wasn't idly considering reading the barely-shorter sequel.

_In the Pines: A Lynching, A Lie, A Reckoning_ by Grace Elizabeth Hale
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Growing up, Hale was told her sheriff grandfather stopped a lynch mob in Jefferson Davis County, Mississippi, only for the Black man he saved to attempt an escape off his watch and be gunned down by Hale's grandfather's deputies. While doing research in the archives of the county, she came to discover this was not true, but exactly what happened was not recorded&mdash;so she decided to find out.

This is the framing for _In the Pines_, a book that is less about that horrific crime than about the race war conducted in the Southeast United States against the Black population through the lens of one small, poor, lightly-populated county in Mississippi. It is not pleasant reading, but it is _necessary_.

The problems with the text are problems the author herself acknowledges: there is precious little about Versey Johnson's life in the book, but that is because there naturally would be little documented about a random poor Black man from the South in the 1920's through the 1940's. Her perspective as the granddaughter fo the man who murdered Johnson is not the one that _should_ be telling this story, but she's also the only person who _will_. Hale is aware of all of this and does not make excuses for her grandfather, nor does she make this story about anything other than what it should be about, but being cognizant of and attempting to compensate for the flaws does not make them go away.

Nevertheless, this is _well_ worth the read.

_The Adventures of Amina Al-Sirafi_ by Shannon Chakraborty
----------------------------------------------------------
A pirate captain gets her crew back together for one last job in the Indian Ocean during the High Middle Ages? And it's from the author of the Daevabad Trilogy? Well, easy pitch for me there, of course I was going to read it. The question was: did Chakraborty have a second story in her?

The answer to this is yes, yes she does... but.

The good news is that _Amina Al-Sirafi_ is just as delightful as its premise would suggest, and at points, even more so. The character work remains great, the thematic work remains strong, and if you're looking for a damn good yarn, you'll get one. However, everything feels a bit less elegant than what we got in _Daevabad_. Some of this is deliberate stylistic choice: this could work as a standalone story, which I like, but the sequel hooks feel a bit glaring for that. Some of it, however, is not: I love that Chakraborty is always sure to have strong LGBT representation in her books, but I'm not sure that I _quite_ buy how accepting the entire pirate crew is of trans-ness. I'm not saying I need to see trans rejection, just that the presentation here didn't quite strike me as true. That might be a failure of imagination on my part&mdash;tragic trans narratives are the default in my brain, not going to pretend they're not or that them being the default in my brain is not a problem&mdash;but still, there it is.

These are minor quibbles, though. If you want a book about pirates running a job that spins horribly out of control when it turns out things are a bit more magical than they were first advertised to be, then yep, this is the book you want, read it right now.

_Leviathan Falls_ by James S A Corey
------------------------------------
So we've reached the end of _The Expanse_, a nine book series of interplanetary science fiction. I kept waiting for the series to descend into a point of "yep, I'm done, checking out now," but it remained resolutely good, each book providing an excellent, discrete[^2] story that kept things at a refreshingly human level, which is impressive when you're dealing with a series whose inciting incident involves a whole lot of alien tech.

[^2]: Well, okay, the eighth book clearly isn't standalone, but you expect that in a series like this.

Well, eight books is a pretty impressive streak. Pity they[^3] didn't stick the landing, but at least they didn't whiff it so hard that it poisons my opinion of earlier books in the series. Spoilers for the series to follow.

[^3]: "James S A Corey" is the pseudonym of Daniel Abraham and Ty Franck.

OK, full disclosure: I didn't really ever care all that much about the aliens in _The Expanse_, and I never once got the sense that the authors did, either. Having the tech there provided a whole lot of really interesting complications, and it provided the antagonist of the last three books with a more interesting motivation than moustache-twirling villainy, but where the aliens came from and where they went were not really questions I had any need to have answered. Unfortunately, the setup in _Tiamat's Wrath_ did make answering some of these questions inevitable.

Fine, fair enough. However, this shift away from interpersonal conflict is also a shift away from the primary strength of the series, which was a frank look at the possible material conditions of the future, and considering how hand-wavey the explanations end up being anyway, well, it's easily the weakest book of the series. It's also frankly unfair to the rest of the series in how it ends: the book ends quite abruptly with the end of James Holden's story, and while Holden was always a main character in the series, this was never _his_ story. The epilogue is a vague gesture at that, but nothing more than that.

So far as the series goes, I think everything from _Leviathan Wakes_ until _Babylon's Ashes_ (1-6) is definitely worth the time, with _Cibola Burn_ probably being my pick for favorite. There's a complete story in there, too. However, books seven through nine are telling a story that I just do not think is anywhere near so compelling, and while the series still hits some point high points in there, the ultimate conclusion makes it difficult for me to recommend wholeheartedly from that point on. I'd hesitate to call anything in the series _bad_, but the ending is a bit of a wet squib, and, well... pity.